# HWK_02.qmd
Eva Belevska

## Homework 2

## Question 1

What were the main issues in the Reinhard and Rogoff issue, and how best
could they have been avoided?

The main issues in this article were that there was a mistake in the
excel sheet which left out vital data in the chart. This resulted in the
data being less accurate than it was reported. This ended up leading
them to create claims that weren’t actually true, but were used in
multiple arguments. This could have been solved by double checking their
data to ensure that all of the countries were included. This could also
have been found and solved earlier if people could have looked over
their work and tried to replicate the graph.

## Question 2

What key attributes make a piece of data analysis “reproducible”? Please
put those attributes in a prioritized list (i.e., for you, what is most
important, next most important, etc…)

- Availability to the public
- ability for others to recreate the analysis instead of just looking it
  over
- ability to keep a record of data.

## Question 3

Imagine that you are doing a piece of data analysis that only you will
ever see: perhaps you are shopping for a car and trying to determine
what will give you the best value for your money. Should you think about
making your data analysis reproducible? Why or why not?

Yes. Although other people may not see the data, you still need to be
able to understand it in the future. If the data set is just a bunch of
different numbers you may not remember what any of those numbers are or
where they came from. This is especially important for making a decision
such as buying a car. By having a reproducible data analysism you will
be able to go back and understand your data and make an informed
decision in the future.
